
        Utool: The Swiss Army Knife of Underspecification
      http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/chorus/utool/

                          Version 3.0
                         19 June, 2006


This package is a tool for performing various tasks that arise in the
context of scope underspecification. Among other things, it will
enumerate readings from an underspecified description and convert
between different equivalent formalisms. These conversions implement
theoretical results from the recent literature, and the enumeration
algorithm is the fastest one known today.

Utool was created within the CHORUS project of the DFG Collaborative
Research Centre (SFB) 378 "Ressource-adaptive cognitive processes" at
Saarland University in Saarbrücken, Germany. The current version 3.0
is implemented in Java, and is more stable, more portable, and more
efficient than earlier versions. It is distributed under the GPL (see
the file COPYING in this directory).


System requirements
-------------------
In order to run Utool, you will need a Java J2SE 5.0 or higher runtime
environment. You can download distribution of the JRE for Windows,
Linux, or Solaris platforms from

   http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/download.jsp

Users of Mac OS X 10.4 or later can download a compatible distribution
of the JRE from

   http://www.apple.com/support/downloads/java2se50release1.html


Running Utool
-------------
Assuming that you have installed Java and it is in your PATH, you can
run Utool as follows:

   java -jar Utool-3.0.jar

This will display some information about the available commands.


Documentation
-------------
We distribute some documentation in the "docs" subdirectory. The file
manual.pdf in this directory is a manual which describes the use of
Utool in detail. You can also view a HTML version of this manual at

http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/chorus/utool/docs/3.0/manual/

The directory "docs/api" contains the full Javadocs of the Utool
package.


Support
-------
If you find bugs in Utool, or something is not explained to your
satisfaction in the manual, please send us an email at
koller@coli.uni-sb.de. We welcome any feedback (positive or negative)
that you can give us, and will try to take your suggestions into
account for new versions.
